Alexandria University
Faculty of Engineering
Computer and Systems Engineering Department
CSE 464: Computer System Security
Assigned: Friday, 21th March, 2025
Due: Thursday, 27th March, 2025
Assignment 6
(Chapter 15)
1 Theoretical Questions
1. SHA1 scans through a document by processing 512-bit blocks. Each block is hashed into
a 160 bit hash code that is then used as the initialization vector for the next block of
512 bits. This obviously requires a 160 bit initialization vector for the first 512-bit block.
Here is the vector:
H_0 = 67452301 (32 bits in hex)
H_1 = efcdab89
H_2 = 98badcfe
H_3 = 10325476
H_4 = c3d2e1f0
How are these numbers selected?
2. What is meant by the strong collision resistance property of a hash function?
2 Programming Questions
To gain further insights into hashing, the goal of this homework is to implement in Python a
very simple hash function (that is meant more for play than for any serious production work).
Write a function that creates a 32-bit hash of a file through the following steps:
1. Initialize the hash to all zeros.
2. Scan the file one byte at a time.
3. Before a new byte is read from the file, circularly shift the bit pattern in the hash to the
left by four positions.
4. Now XOR the new byte read from the file with the least significant byte of the hash.
Now scan your directory and compute the hash of all your files. Dump the hash values
in some output file.
Now write another two-line script to check if your hashing function is exhibiting any collisions.
Even though we have a trivial hash function, it is very likely that you will not see any collisions
even if your directory is large. Subsequently, by using a couple of files (containing random text)
created specially for this demonstration, show how you can make their hash codes to come out
to be the same if you alter one of the files by appending to it a stream of bytes that would
Prof. Dr. Sahar Ghanem 1 Eng. Ahmed Saeed
Alexandria University
Faculty of Engineering
Computer and Systems Engineering Department
CSE 464: Computer System Security
Assigned: Friday, 21th March, 2025
Due: Thursday, 27th March, 2025
be the XOR of the original hash values for the files (after you have circularly rotated the hash
value for the first file by 4 bits to the left). NOTE: This homework is easy to implement in
Python if you use the BitVector class.
Notes
• This assignment is based on Computer and Network Security by Avinash Kak.
• Lecture code: https://engineering.purdue.edu/kak/compsec/code/Lecture15Code.
tar.gz
• For the Theoretical Questions part, you must answer it individually.
• For the Programming Questions part, you can work in teams of three. Each team
must submit the source code and a report showing the pseudocode of the main parts,
the program outputs, your explanations to the outputs got, and answers to any questions
asked in the problem statements.
Prof. Dr. Sahar Ghanem 2 Eng. Ahmed Saeed